Draft for Unpoly 4
==================

Focus
-----

- Focus on removal and simplification.
- Use browser-native functionality where possible.
- Focus on cleaning up mistakes.
- Don't do [up-frame] in V4. Users deserve a break from disrupting API changes.


Strong candidates
-----------------

- Is `scrollbar-gutter: stable` a replacement for up.BodyShifter?
  - https://caniuse.com/mdn-css_properties_scrollbar-gutter 
- Drop `{ batch: true }` option for `up.watch()`
- Rework and simplify form data parsing
  - Goals 
    - Delete our own form data parsing in up.Params.fromFields() and .fromContainer()
    - Support custom form elements using the `formdata` event
    - Support custom form elements using `ElementInternals`
  - Maybe we could replace it all with `new FormData(form)`
    - The one place where we need to parse form data *for a field or container* is when watching a container using `up.watch()` or `[up-watch]`
    - Another approach is to weaken the `watch()` contract and just rely on input / change events 
    - We could still compare values of the *entire* form to de-dup multiple events
    - There's a small change that an unwatched part of the form changes
  - We might get rid of `up.form.config.fieldSelectors`
  - We could again rely on just event delegation in `up.FieldWatcher`
- Check if we can replace `{ submitButton }` with `new FormData(form, submitter)`
- Consider removing all up.migrate polyfills (and library hooks!) except changes from v3 => v4
  - Users would need to upgrade to v3 before upgrading to v4
  - Users could no longer stay on unpoly-migrate forever without updating their code
  => Check impact before we do this
- Deprecate `[up-id]` in favor of just `[id]`
  - This is required if we ever want to use something like idiomorph, which relies on `[id]` heavily
- Replace `up.URLPattern` with standard `URLPattern`
  - Not yet supported by Firefox and Safari: https://caniuse.com/mdn-api_urlpattern
    - Webkit: Not even a bug yet
    - Firefox: https://bugzilla.mozilla.org/show_bug.cgi?id=1731418
  - Polyfillable: https://github.com/kenchris/urlpattern-polyfill
  - Existing dollar `$syntax` for matching digits would need to be replaced with regexes
  - A migrate warning would be possible
- Remove `up.rails` package
  - This was only needed for co-existence with rails-ujs. Modern Rails apps no longer include this.
  - We could also offer this as an optional file (unpoly-rails-ujs.js)
  - Unpoly core already parses `[data-confirm]` and `[data-method]`. No additional support is needed just to use { method } and { confirm } options from Rails helpers.
- Internals: Consider replacing up.`Record with` custom constructors
- Consider removing `up.copy.key` && `up.isEqual.key`
  - Poll users
  - This is currently used by `up.Params`
- Consider an { onUpdate } callback so users can setup view transitions or implement morphins
  - See view-transitions.md  
- Consider removing layer context
  - I think users find it sufficient to look at X-Up-Mode instead
  - Poll users
- Remove `:has()` polyfill
  - Firefox ESR should get :has() support in Q4/2024
    - https://whattrainisitnow.com/calendar/
  - We can also do this later as it's not a breaking change
  - Also many docs mention this as a key difference between up.element and up.fragment
- Once we use native :has(), can we get replace up.Selector with CSS selector expansion?
  - Excluding .up-destroying would just be :is(original-selector):not(.up-destroying, .up-destroying *)
  - Matching layers would require a longer selector
    - :is(original-selector):is([up-layer-index=3], [up-layer-index=3] * [up-layer-index=4])
- Consider making secondary targets optional by default
- Remove event mapping
  - Remove up.form.config.watchInputEvents
  - Remove up.form.config.watchChangeEvents
    - Why do we still have a test for date inputs being watched on blur instead of change?
  - Remove doc section "Normalizing non-standard events"
- Implement up.motion with the web animations API
  - We can also remove `up.CSSTransition`
- Replace up.util.reverse() with Array#toReversed()
  - https://caniuse.com/mdn-javascript_builtins_array_toreversed
    - Safari has this since September 2022, so Summer 2024 should be fine
    - Firefox ESR already has this
- Async compiler functions
  - Many edge cases: See separate doc `2023-08-08 Async Compilers.txt`
  - This might change some method signatures
  - Made somewhat easier since we no longer report compiler errors
  - See separate doc
- Remove `up.reveal()` and most of the `up.viewport` module
  - Use `Element#scrollIntoView()`
  - config.revealSnap and config.revealPadding could be solved by setting scroll-padding on the scrolling container
  - This also lets us remove up.RevealMotion, up.Rect, [up-fixed]
  - We still need [up-anchored=right] to do Bootstrap-style scrollbars
  - Do we still need viewport awareness when we're no longer scrolling ourselves?
    - How many apps really have multiple viewports? 
    - Maybe for resetting?
    - Could we just reset the main viewport of that layer?
    - Could we offer events or config options so users can implement custom reveal / reset ?
- Replace `.up-focus-visible` and `.up-focus-hidden` classes with `Element#focus({ focusVisible })`
  - Browser support is still poor 
    - https://caniuse.com/mdn-api_htmlelement_focus_options_focusvisible_parameter
    - What `{ focusVisible }` cannot do is stickiness: Switch to other window, switch back
      - Maybe that's OK
- Remove selector/element/jQuery argument normalization
  - Consider requiring elements for functions that work with elements, not selectors or jQuery collections
    - We still want selectors for anything I would use from an HTML attribute 
  - Remove all remaining jQuery support
    - We could warn in `up.element.get()`
- `[up-instant]` and `[up-preload]` should listen on `pointerdown` instead of `mousedown`
  - This could break some tests that only send `mousedown`
  - Maybe migrate should print a warning when such an element receives a synthetic `mousedown` event, but no `pointerdown` within the same task. 
- Publish and document thrown exceptions
  - But consider waiting until async compilers, as we're changing some method signatures
  - How do we document async rejections?
    - `up.link.preload()` documents in `@return`
    - I'd much rather a `@throw` or `@throws` declaration
- Consider removing `X-Up-Title`, `[up-title]` and `{ title }` since we now auto-update head elements
- Check if we can replace `up.Params` with `FormData` and a few helper methods
  - I guess we would use a `FormData` value in `{ params }` instead of up.Params
  - Migrate could check if we're using up.Params methods on this thing
- Consider using native `<dialog>` element for overlays
  - Example with nested dialogs: https://codepen.io/triskweline/pen/WNWEjQx
  - We would save the focus trap code
  - We would no longer need to mess with `z-index` values
  - This would simplify layer lookup to `element.closest('dialog:open, html')`
  - We could potentially lose `up.LayerStack` and store all layer information in the dialog elements
    - This would allow users to render a page with an existing modal already open, and it would immmediately go into the layer stack
      - We would need to parse that layer to initialize it
        - E.g. implement light-dismiss
      - There is currently no way to default-open a modal! `<dialog open>` opens a non-modal dialog.
      - We might also conflict with other libraries that want to use <dialog> and now occupy the frontmost layer
      - => Don't do this now
  - This would mean another breaking change for users, especially for the markup.
    - We need the markup to move away from custom elements because we need to attach to <dialog> 
    - It's better to completely change the markup rather than change the meaning of the existing elements
    - ```
      dialog.up-drawer
        div.up-drawer-viewport         # keep this around so the box doesn't need a margin. but how are we going to do this with viewport-less types, like lightbox?
          div.up-drawer-box            
            button.up-drawer-dismiss   # we can now use propert buttons
            div.up-drawer-content
       ::backdrop
      ```
  - It would a lot of work to sync the dialog API with the Unpoly layer API
    - If we use the DOM as our LayerStack, vanilla-opened dialogs are Unpoly dialogs.
      - Their APIs either need to be interchangable.
      - Or we ignore non-Unpoly dialogs
    - E.g. you can close a dialog with `HTMLDialogElement.close()`, but this does not change Unpoly's layer stack
    - Dialogs have `close()`, but Unpoly layers have accept/dismiss
    - Dialogs have `close(resultValue)` and closeEvent.resultValue. The default value here is "default".
      - Maybe dismissal could be encoded in that value, e.g. :dismiss(key), :dismiss(button) and anything else is acceptance
      - Or we get rid of the destinction
        - Poll users 
    - Maybe a compromise would be: We keep most of our API, but also don't get into an undefined state if someone uses native dialog methods on us (in particular `close()`)
    - Would we keep our own events? 
      - No! 
        - There is no `open` event
          - Opening non-Unpoly overlays can only be detected with MutationObserver 
        - There is no `opened` event
        - There is a `close` event, but it cannot be prevented
          - Would be a good signal for "external close" 
        - There is no `closed` event
  - Would we replace `up.Layer` with just the `HTMLDialogElement`?
    - Rather not. 
    - There is a *lot* of state and API that we currently store in `up.Layer`
      - E.g. it's nice to say `layer.accept()` or `layer.contentElement` 
  - Check if we still need `config.foreignOverlaySelectors`
- Address maintenance burden with popup overlays
  - Problems with popups
    - Are the only non-modal overlay option, so we cannot share as much code with the other popup options
    - Our homegrown tethering takes a lot of code and only supports basic positioning. It would take even more code to do it well.
    - There's more popup-only code in up.Layer.OverlayWithTether
  - Consider dropping
    - Poll need with users
    - Local-content popups can be done well by `[popover]`, Bootstrap or other libraries
    - Remote-content popups, or multi-page content are super painful without Unpoly
  - Consider separating from layer
  - Consider implementing as non-modal dialogs
  - Consider implementing with `[popover]`
    - https://caniuse.com/mdn-api_htmlelement_popover
    - There is not much we want from this API except maybe native light-dismiss. But we already need to roll our own light-dismiss for our dialogs.
  - Consider extraction into its own plugin
  - Replace `up.Tether` with CSS anchor positioning / [anchor-name]
    - https://blog.logrocket.com/use-css-anchor-positioning/
    - Browser support is still poor
      - https://caniuse.com/css-anchor-positioning
      - Firefox will get [popover] before it gets anchor positioning, but without anchored positions
      - There is a polyfill, but we need to check how well this works from JS: https://github.com/oddbird/css-anchor-positioning
  - Consider requiring an external library for tethering (e.g. "Floating UI")
  - Consider just adding hooks for your own positioning
    - E.g. events like `up:tether:start`, `up:tether:update` or `up:tether:stop`
    - Users would be responsible for parsing their own options from `event.target` or `event.anchor`
  

Low confidence / Much design work needed
----------------------------------------

- Implement the cache in a service worker
- Replace target merging in up.FormValidator with a generic request merging facility that merges headers
  - This is not only about merging requests. FormValidator does a lot of work to merge *render options*.
- `up.animate()` and `up.morph()` could return an `Animation` object
  - For what?
  - If people manually call `Animate#finish()` etc. this may make it harder to enforce our motion logic
- Reconsider objects that also serve as their own promises
  - Instead the promise could be returned by a property like #loaded or #rendered
    - `up.Request`: Instead of `await up.request()` users would say `await up.request().loaded`
    - `up.RenderJob`: Instead of `await up.render()` users would say `await up.render().rendered`
  - This would be more in sync with how the Animation API works
    - But otherwise it's worse econonomics
    - And we're not even going to return `Animation` objects from motion functions
  - This *might* make it easier to compose with standard promises
    - Challenge that with actual code, since supporting `await up.render().finished` also already a PITA now
  - We could polyfill it
- Consider moving history-related methods from `up.Layer.Base` to `up.history`
  - All other packages work by taking a `{ layer }` option, why not history-related?
  - `up.history` is currently a low-level module, like `up.element`
  - This change would require a lot more design.
- Automatic `up.hello()` with `MutationObserver`
  - This seems to make more problems than solutions whenever another DOM manipulating library is involved :(
  - Needs to be async?
    - Effects of insertion could not be observed until 1 task later
    - This would make up.destroy() async
  - Performance?
  - Possibly disable observing while we are rendering content ourselves
    - Compilers should still insert elements and see them auto-compiled
    - Maybe like this:
      ```
      disableObserver()
      insertElements()
      enableObserver()
      compileElements
      ```
  - Edge cases
    - Macros can insert elements with other macros
      - Do we want this?
      - Do we still need macros with auto-compilation?
    - Compilers can insert elements and see them auto-compiled
    - React
      - Compilers that change the DOM should not cause React to permanently re-render a subtree (the VDOM didn't change, but the DOM did)
      - Compilers that change the DOM should not cause React to undo these DOM changes
      - We should not cause hydration errors when pre-rendering on the server
        - The compiler might only run on the client
      - https://legacy.reactjs.org/docs/integrating-with-other-libraries.html
      - https://preactjs.com/guide/v10/external-dom-mutations/
    - Maybe we need a way to disable Unpoly for a subtree ([up-ignore])
- Consider removing transitions/morphing with ViewTransitions (single-document)
  - See `view-transitions.md` 
